---
layout: glossary
title: σ-algebra
category: Measure Theory
---

## Definition
Let $$ \Omega $$ be a nonempty set. A **σ-algebra** on $$ \Omega $$ is a collection $$ \mathcal{A} $$ of subsets of $$ \Omega $$ satisfying the following conditions:

 1. $$\mathcal{A}$$ contains $$ \Omega $$, that is, $$ \Omega \in \mathcal{A} $$.
 2. $$\mathcal{A}$$ is closed under complementation; if $$ A \in \mathcal{A} $$, then its complement
   
   $$ A^\complement = \Omega \setminus A \in \mathcal{A}. $$
   
 3. $$\mathcal{A}$$ is closed under countable unions; if $$ A_1, A_2, A_3, \ldots \in \mathcal{A} $$ is a countable collection of subsets, then

   $$ A_1 \cup A_2 \cup A_3 \cup \cdots \in \mathcal{A}. $$

The pair $$(\Omega, \mathcal{A})$$ is a **measurable space**. If the third condition is relaxed to closure under finite unions, then $$\mathcal{A}$$ is an **algebra**. All σ-algebras are algebras.

The intersection of a family $$\{ \mathcal{F}_{\lambda} \}_{\lambda \in \Lambda}$$ of σ-algebras on $$\Omega$$ is also a σ-algebra. Given a collection $$\mathcal{E} \subseteq \mathcal{P}(\Omega)$$ of subsets of $$\Omega$$, the **σ-algebra generated by $$\mathcal{E}$$**, denoted $$\sigma(\mathcal{E})$$, is the intersection of all σ-algebras that contain $$\mathcal{E}$$.[^1]

 [^1]: Note that the discrete σ-algebra always contains $$\mathcal{E}$$, so this definition makes sense.

## Examples

- Perhaps the most obvious example of a σ-algebra is the **trivial σ-algebra**, which is the collection

  $$\{ \emptyset, \Omega \}$$

  where $$\Omega$$ is any nonempty set. This is the smallest possible σ-algebra on a set $$\Omega$$, since the first and second conditions immediately imply $$\emptyset = \Omega^\complement \in \mathcal{A}$$. At the other end, the **discrete σ-algebra**

  $$\mathcal{P}(\Omega) = \{ A : A \subseteq \Omega \}$$

  is the largest possible σ-algebra on a set $$\Omega$$ since it contains every possible subset of $$\Omega$$. All other σ-algebras lie somewhere between these extremes.

- Let $$\Omega = \{ \diamondsuit, \clubsuit, \heartsuit, \spadesuit \}$$ and suppose

  $$\mathcal{A} = \bigl\{ \emptyset, \{ \diamondsuit, \heartsuit \}, \{ \clubsuit, \spadesuit \}, \Omega \bigr\}.$$

  Then $$\mathcal{A}$$ is a σ-algebra on $$\Omega$$ since $$\{ \diamondsuit, \heartsuit \} \cup \{ \clubsuit, \spadesuit \} = \Omega$$ and $$\{ \diamondsuit, \heartsuit \}^\complement = \Omega \setminus \{ \diamondsuit, \heartsuit \} = \{ \clubsuit, \spadesuit \}$$, so $$\mathcal{A}$$ satisfies the three conditions. There are many other σ-algebras on $$\Omega$$, another is

  $$\mathcal{B} = \bigl\{ \emptyset, \{ \diamondsuit \}, \{ \heartsuit \}, \{ \diamondsuit, \heartsuit \}, \{ \clubsuit, \spadesuit \}, \{ \diamondsuit, \clubsuit, \spadesuit \}, \{ \heartsuit, \clubsuit, \spadesuit \}, \Omega \bigr\}.$$

  In fact, there are exactly 15 σ-algebras on $$\Omega$$ which correspond to the [15 partitions of the set $$\Omega$$]({{ site.baseurl }}{% post_url 2018-02-28-set-paritions %}).

- Let $$\Omega = \{ \text{H}, \text{T} \}$$ be the sample space for the toss of a coin. The σ-algebra generated by $$\Omega$$ is 

  $$\mathcal{C} = \bigl\{ \emptyset, \{ \text{H} \}, \{ \text{T} \}, \{ \text{H}, \text{T} \} \bigr\}.$$

  This is a precise way of describing all possible outcomes that may occur on the toss of a coin and enables the outcomes to be assigned probabilities with a [measure]({{ site.url }}/glossary/measure/).

  Here, $$\{\text{H}\}$$ corresponds to head and $$\{\text{T}\}$$ tails; $$\{ \text{H}, \text{T} \}$$ corresponds to either heads or tails (probability of occuring is 1); and $$\emptyset$$ corresponds to neither heads nor tails (probability of occuring is 0).

- Suppose $$\Omega$$ can be partitioned into a union of disjoint sets, that is,

  $$\Omega = \bigcup_{\alpha \in A} X_\alpha $$
  
  where $$X_\alpha \cap A_\beta = \emptyset$$ for all $$\alpha \ne \beta$$. Then these $$X_\alpha$$ are **atoms** which generate the **atomic σ-algebra**,

  $$\mathcal{A} = \sigma\bigl(\{ X_\alpha \}_{\alpha\in A}\bigr) = \sigma\bigl(\{ X_\alpha : \alpha\in A\}\bigr).$$

  The trivial σ-algebra is an example of an atomic σ-algebra. The entire space $$\Omega$$ is the only atom, which recovers $$\sigma(\{ \Omega \}) = \{ \emptyset, \Omega \}$$.

  An atom of a σ-algebra $$A \in \mathcal{A}$$ is also characterised by the property that if $$E \subseteq A$$ and $$E \in \mathcal{A}$$, then either $$E = \emptyset$$ or $$E = A$$.

- Let $$\Omega = [0, 1)$$ and let $$D_n$$ denote the set of dyadic intervals on $$\Omega$$, that is,

  $$D_n = \biggl\{ \Bigl[0, \frac{1}{2^n}\Bigr), \Bigl[\frac{1}{2^n}, \frac{2}{2^n}\Bigr), \Bigl[\frac{2}{2^n}, \frac{3}{2^n}\Bigr), \ldots, \Bigl[\frac{2^n-1}{2^n}, 1\Bigr) \biggr\} = \bigcup_{k=1}^{2^n} \biggl\{ \Bigl[\frac{k-1}{2^n}, \frac{k}{2^k} \Bigr) \biggr\}.$$

  The elements of $$D_n$$ are atoms which generate the ***n*th dyadic σ-algebra**, $$\mathcal{D}_n = \sigma(D_n)$$. For example, if $$n = 2$$, then

  $$D_2 = \bigl\{[0, 1/4), [1/4, 1/2), [1/2, 3/4), [3/4, 1) \bigr\}.$$

  The σ-algebra $$\mathcal{D}_2$$ consists of all unions (including the empty union) of elements in $$D_2$$ and contains 16 elements. In general, $$\mathcal{D}_n$$ has $$2^{2^n}$$ elements.

- Let $$\Omega$$ be an uncountable set. A subset $$E \subseteq \Omega$$ is cocountable if its complement $$E^\complement = \Omega \setminus E$$ is countable. The collection of subsets

  $$\mathcal{E} = \bigl\{ E \subseteq \Omega : E \text{ is countable or cocountable} \bigr\}$$

  is the **σ-algebra of countable and cocountable sets**. Note that if $$E_1, E_2, E_3, \ldots \subseteq \mathcal{E}$$ is a countable collection of subsets, then the union $$\bigcup_{n=1}^{\infty} E_n$$ is countable if all the sets $$E_1, E_2, E_3, \ldots$$ are countable, otherwise it is cocountable.

  This σ-algebra is an atomic σ-algebra generated by singleton subset atoms of $$\Omega$$. Indeed, let
  
  $$\mathcal{S} = \sigma\bigl( \bigl\{ \{ \omega \} \bigr\}_{\omega \in \Omega} \bigr) = \sigma\bigl( \bigl\{ \{ \omega \} : \omega \in \Omega \bigr\} \bigr).$$
  
  Then for all $$\omega \in \Omega$$, the singleton set $$\{ \omega \} \in \mathcal{E} $$ since it is finite, and therefore $$\mathcal{S} \subseteq \mathcal{E}$$ since $$\mathcal{S}$$ is, by definition, the smallest σ-algebra that contains the singleton subsets of $$\Omega$$. On the other hand, if $$E \in \mathcal{E}$$ then either $$E$$ or $$E^\complement$$ is countable and can therefore be expressed as a countable union of singleton sets. In either case, $$E \in \mathcal{S}$$, so $$\mathcal{E} \subseteq \mathcal{S}$$. Hence, $$\mathcal{E} = \mathcal{S}$$.

- Given a topological space $$(X, \mathcal{T})$$, the σ-algebra generated by the collection of all open sets, $$\mathcal{T}$$, is called the **Borel σ-algebra** on $$X$$, denoted $$\mathcal{B}_X$$.

- Suppose $$(X_1, \Sigma_1)$$ and $$(X_2, \Sigma_2)$$ are measurable spaces. The **product σ-algebra** on $$X_1 \times X_2$$ is the σ-algebra[^2]

  $$\Sigma_1 \otimes \Sigma_2 = \sigma\bigl(\bigl\{ E_1 \times E_2 : E_1 \in \Sigma_1, E_2 \in \Sigma_2 \bigr\}\bigr).$$

  The product of $$(X_1, \Sigma_1)$$ and $$(X_2, \Sigma_2)$$ is the measurable space $$(X_1 \times X_2, \Sigma_1 \otimes \Sigma_2)$$.

[^2]: More generally, if $$\{(X_\alpha, \Sigma_\alpha)\}_{\alpha \in A}$$ is any collection of measurable spaces, $$X = \prod_{\alpha\in A} X_\alpha$$ is the cartesian product and $$\pi_\alpha \colon X \to X_\alpha $$ are coordinate maps, then the product σ-algebra on $$X$$ is

    $$\bigotimes_{\alpha \in A} \Sigma_\alpha = \sigma \left ( \{ {\pi_\alpha}^{-1}(E_\alpha) : E_\alpha \in \Sigma_\alpha, \alpha \in A \} \right ).$$

## Properties

 - σ-algebras are also closed under countable intersections, by de Morgan's Laws. If $$A_1, A_2, A_3, \ldots \in \mathcal{A}$$, then by conditions 2 and 3,
   
   $$\bigcap_{n=1}^{\infty} A_n = \Biggl(\bigcup_{n=1}^{\infty} A_n\Biggr)^\complement \in \mathcal{A}.$$

 - Let $$\Lambda$$ be an index set. The intersection of a family $$\{ \mathcal{F}_{\lambda} \}_{\lambda \in \Lambda}$$ of σ-algebras on $$\Omega$$ is also a σ-algebra. Let 

    $$\mathcal{F} = \bigcap_{\lambda\in\Lambda} \mathcal{F}_\lambda.$$
 
   Clearly, $$\Omega \in \mathcal{F}$$. If $$A \in \mathcal{F}$$, then $$A \in \mathcal{F}_\lambda$$ for all $$\lambda \in \Lambda$$ meaning that $$A^\complement \in \mathcal{F}_\lambda$$ for all $$\lambda \in \Lambda$$. Therefore, $$A^\complement \in \mathcal{F}$$. Suppose $$A_1, A_2, A_3, \ldots \in \mathcal{F}$$. Then $$A_1, A_2, A_3, \ldots \in \mathcal{F}_\lambda$$ for all $$\lambda \in \Lambda$$, so $$A_1 \cup A_2 \cup A_3 \cup \cdots \in \mathcal{F}_\lambda$$ for all $$\lambda \in \Lambda$$. Hence, $$A_1 \cup A_2 \cup A_3 \cup \cdots \in \mathcal{F}$$, so $$\mathcal{F}$$ is a σ-algebra.

 - There is no infinitely countable σ-algebra; if $$\mathcal{A}$$ is an infinite σ-algebra then it must be uncountable.

 {::comment}
 Folland 1.2
 http://euclid.trentu.ca/pivato/Teaching/measure.pdf
 https://terrytao.files.wordpress.com/2011/01/measure-book1.pdf
 {:/comment}